

# Hypertensive Disease Prevalence in the United States (2019–2024)

## Author

Alexandrine Bilwes Crane  
Cornell University

## Contact

ac292@cornell.edu  

## Overview

This project examines trends in hypertensive prevalence in the United States,
as a function of gender, age, and poverty level.


## Research Questions

This project aims to explore the following questions:

* Is there a disparity in how hypertension affects people based on age groups?
* Is there a disparity in how hypertension affects people based on gender?
* Is there a disparity in how hypertension affects people based on poverty levels?

## Context

The Age groups considered are:

The Poverty Levels considered are:

The data is collected between 1988 and 03/2022


## Data

Data come from publicly available reports from the Centers for Disease Control.

https://data.cdc.gov/National-Center-for-Health-Statistics/DQS-Hypertension-in-adults-age-20-and-older-by-sel/va5e-efw9/about_data

We use a simplified data set:


## Methods


The analysis includes:

 -Exploratory data analysis of the prevalence of hypertensive disease

 -Trend analysis over time

 -Impact comparison versus age and gender

 -Impact comparison versus income level

All analyses are conducted in R using RStudio.

## Repository Structure
```
VaccinationHesitancy/  
│
├── analysis  # R script for data cleaning and analysis 
        ├──Hypertension_Poverty

├── data      # Raw and processed datasets
        ├──DQS_Hypertension_in_adults_age_20_and_older,_by_selected_characteristics__United_States._20260302.csv
        ├──Hypertension_in_adults_age_20_and_older.csv

├── output    # Figures generated by the analysis
        ├──Hypertension_Age_Gender.png
        ├──Hypertension_Poverty.png

├── report    # Markdown report
        ├──Hypertension_Poverty.pdf

└── README.md # Project overview  


```
## Reproducibility

To reproduce the analysis:

Install packages:
- ggplot2
- dplyr
- scales
- stringr
- janitor
- tidyverse
- kableExtra
- car
- patchwork

Clone the repository

Open the project in RStudio

Run the analysis scripts or render the R Markdown report.

## Observations  

The prevalence of hypertension between men and women is different between ages 18 and  59 (ref 1).  
However, the rate at which women develop hypertension starting age 18 is much steeper compared to men (ref 2). 
A disparity in the prevalence of hypertension is also observed for the four income level analyzed: this 
trend seems to indicate that hypertension is more prevalent for individuals at poverty levels up to 399% of 
the Federal Poverty Level (ref 3).  

## References

* 1.	Connelly PJ, Currie G, Delles C.  
Sex Differences in the Prevalence, Outcomes and Management of Hypertension. 
Curr Hypertens Rep. 2022 Jun,24(6):185-92.
doi: 10.1007/s11906-022-01183-8

* 2.	Ostchega Y, Fryar CD, Nwankwo T, Nguyen DT. Hypertension prevalence among adults aged 18 and over: United States, 2017–2018. 
NCHS Data Brief. 2020;364:1–8.

* 3.	Hardy ST, Jaeger BC, Foti K, Ghazi L, Wozniak G, Muntner P. 
Trends in Blood Pressure Control among US Adults With Hypertension, 2013–2014 to 2021–2023. 
Am J Hypertens. 2025;38(2):120-128. 
doi:10.1093/ajh/hpae141


## Notes  

Project developed as part of an MPH data analysis project.

## A.I. Disclosure
ChatGPT was used to find functions and syntax needed for programming goals. AI was also used for debugging purposes. 