# Hypertension Project Analysis and Simulation

## Effect of Age and Gender on the prevalence of Hypertensive disease

We look at the impact of hypertension in men and women as they age, and also in 2 different time periods.
This study is based on CDC data
"DQS_Hypertension_in_adults_age_20_and_older_by_selected_characteristic_United_States_20260302.csv".
https://data.cdc.gov/National-Center-for-Health-Statistics/DQS-Hypertension-in-adults-age-20-and-older-by-sel/va5e-efw9/about_data

Each row is the estimate of the percent with hypertension for each subgroup. 
The data frame contains 480 rows and 25 columns.
The Variables we will be focusing on are:
- Subgroup: Age & Gender Female or Male 20-34 yrs, 35-44yrs, 45-54yrs, 55-64yrs, 75yrs and older   
- Nesting_Label: Male Female
- Time Period: 1988-1994, 1995-1998, 1999-2000, 2001-2004, 2005-2008, 2009-2012, 2013-2016, 2017-Mar2020
- Estimate (%): continuous between 8.8 and 88.1
- Standard Error: continuous between 0.9 to 3.6

* Does hypertension affect men and women in the same fashion? 
* Has there been a change in the impact of hypertensive disease between the years 1990s and the late 2010s?

## Simulation to explore validity of data presented in 
Suaarez-Gonzalez et al. (2025) Frontiers in Public Health 10.3389  "Relationships between diet, sociodemographic factors, and body composition in students from UNEMI"

# Usage

Open the R markdown file Hypertension.Rmd in RStudio and click "Knit"

All analyses are conducted in R using RStudio.

Repository Structure
MPH/Hypertension
├── data/        # Raw and processed data sets
├── output/      # Tables and figures generated by the analysis
├── analysis/    # R or Rmarkdown scripts for data cleaning and analysis
├── report/      # R Markdown pdf report
└── README.md    # Project overview

# Reproducibility

To reproduce the analysis:

Clone the repository

Open the project in RStudio

Run the analysis scripts or render the R Markdown report.

# Notes

Author: Alexandrine Bilwes Crane
Cornell University
ac292@cornell.edu

Project developed as part of an MPH data analysis project.

A.I. Disclosure: ChatGPT was used to find functions and syntax needed for programming goals.